We've got to recognize [music] that the
recession of democracy
is a phenomenon and then the
international rule of law is in retreat
as well.
>> David Milliband once a politician now
leading one of the world's largest aid
organizations.
>> We need to save lives.
>> I think the elephant in the room in this
conversation is the United States.
>> What comes to [music] my mind is that
the US was the anchor of the global
system. didn't mean that it played a
role in every part of it. Didn't mean
that it got everything right, but it was
the anchor and the anchor's been pulled
up avowedly.
>> From Bloomberg Weekend, [music]
this is the Michelle Hussein Show.
I know there's never been an easy time
to run an aid agency, but this
particular moment feels especially
charged. There are millions of people
around the world in need and at the same
time powerful governments are cutting
back on their giving. That's the world
that David Miband has to navigate every
day. He's been running the International
Rescue Committee for more than a decade
now. It is a New York-based
organization. It works in the US and
across the globe. And he came to the job
as a politician. He'd been Britain's
foreign secretary, the country's top
diplomat, seen as a future prime
minister. And then in 2010, he had a
shock when in a Labour leadership
election, his party chose his brother
over him. It's a long time ago now, and
he has built a new career with energy
and passion, as you'll hear. But his old
friends in Labor are now in power in the
UK. And that government like others is
cutting back on foreign aid. So
obviously when he came into the studio
in London I wanted to know how he feels
about that. There is British political
chat in this conversation and David
Mibant also talks about his old boss
Tony Blair. But I'd also been thinking
about his background, about how his
parents, both Jewish, had narrow escapes
from Nazi occupied Europe as children.
And that's where this conversation
begins.
>> My dad's family story involved a lot of
trauma and tragedy. But he came to the
UK in 1940, 16year-old. He became a
student. He thought it was ridiculous to
be studying in Cambridge instead of
fighting fascism. So he joined the Royal
Navy and despite the trauma there and he
was not a sort of he didn't see himself
as a heroic figure in in the war effort
there was a lot of talk about it. There
was a lot of talk about how his mother
and sister survived um a call to report
to Brussels railway station where many
of their relatives did and were never
seen again.
>> And he had just got out literally in the
last chance to leave Belgium with his
father.
>> Last chance. His mother and sister were
saved effectively by a Catholic family
south of Brussels. So on his side there
was more discussion including of 43
family members that he lost in the
Holocaust. On my mother's side she found
it much more difficult to talk about it.
In fact she didn't didn't talk about it.
>> Didn't she spend much of the war in
hiding as a child? She lived through
Nazi occupation.
>> Well she was younger. So she was born in
1934. My dad was born in 1924.
And so for her, hidden in a convent
first of all, hidden then by a family
that they knew in Wars. So she lost her
father in concentration camp and her
mother sent her just as a 12-year-old to
the UK in 1946 on her own
>> to stay with
>> to stay as part of a group of Jewish
kids who were sent actually orphan kids
>> start a new life.
>> Yeah. And I think that for her it was
just too the trauma was too great. So
she didn't talk about it. I think I once
wrote the the first refugees I ever met
were my parents and that's the truth.
And they they did want to give us the
security that they didn't have. But
there was this slightly bifocated one
part of the story filled in, another
part of the story less filled in.
Ironically, when I went to apply to be
the CEO of the International Rescue
Committee, they said, "Why do you want
this job? You're in politics at the
moment." I was backbench MP. They said,
"Well, one, I like really difficult
problems and how you deliver
humanitarian aid in Syria between the
Asad government, the Russians,
branches of al-Qaeda is a really
difficult problem. I'd like to work on
difficult problems." Secondly, I said an
organization founded by Albert Einstein
in the 1930s, you don't get better
shoulders to stand on than that. founded
by Albert Einstein who'd written letters
to Elellanena Roosevelt pleading with
her to persuade her husband the
president to let Jews and others from
Europe come into America and and failed
in that and so set up the International
Rescue Committee really as a response to
that. But then thirdly, I said my
parents were both refugees and so some
of the clients of the International
Rescue Committee are people who fled
across borders. others are still stuck
in war zones. And so I felt in some way
I guess I was closing a bit of a circle,
helping people of different generation,
different religion probably, but whose
circumstances I could at least relate to
through the experience of my parents.
>> And it's absolutely understandable that
that trauma that your mother experienced
that it was very difficult for her to
talk about it. Did you just understand
that and navigate around it or do you
remember asking her and trying to find
out?
>> I think we must have picked up the
vibes. I think I don't remember doing
the equivalent of a Bloomberg or Today
program interview trying to pump her for
the uh for the answers. I mean her
mother was still alive. So I remember my
grandmother but obviously different
people take it in different ways and
come through learning different lessons.
I guess
>> she named you, didn't she, after her
father. Your grandfather, your murdered
grandfather was David.
>> Yes, he was David Kak. And actually
there was a certain element of closure
including for her in the in 2016 out of
the blue I got an email from a German
voluntary historical society saying we
think we've now concluded our work about
the Hilfingan uh concentration camp and
we're convinced that we've now located
the records that show that your
grandfather was brought here from Awitz
in November 1944 and he was killed in
January 1945. 5. And we've done that for
many of those who lost their lives here.
And we're going to have a ceremony to
mark this place. And so I was able to go
with with brother Ed and with my mother
and her sister to finally 60 years
later, 70 years later, mark the loss of
her father.
>> How did you feel standing there?
>> I felt the weight of terrible trauma
really. I mean I looked at my mother who
was you know 10 years old when she lost
her father. She hadn't seen him for four
years and you just think there but for
the grace of God really. I mean it's a a
feeling of the emptiness on one side and
the fortune on the other
>> and also January 1945 when camps are
being liberated elsewhere.
>> I mean it's
>> nearly at the end.
>> Yeah. And it's obviously far from the
only story of this kind. And so one
doesn't want to um one wants to absorb
it as a personal story.
>> But I wonder if you do you think about
this heritage when you come face to face
with people in desperate situations
which you do.
>> You don't need family heritage for your
head and your heart to just bond with
that person in a really I think profound
way. And so I think that I wouldn't want
to overplay
that. But I there is one element though
whenever any of us grow up we think what
we're experiencing is normal and I grew
up in a relatively middle-ass family in
the 1970s and 1980s in London in Leeds
and that seemed like the norm. We lived
in a democratic country. We live in the
country of liberties.
with all that's going on in the world
today, suddenly the period
1945 to 2026
in in Western Europe and certainly the
period of the Cold War and the immediate
postcold war doesn't look like the norm.
It looks like the exception. And so
these questions that are being raised by
all sorts of people about remembering
that it's a narrow corridor, the one
between a state that's too strong and is
dictatorial and a state that's too weak
and you've got anarchy. I I I was lucky
enough to grow up in this narrow
corridor.
>> Well, as it happens, speaking of how the
world has changed, I found myself
reading back a speech you gave in 2007
when you were British foreign secretary.
>> Well, it's fascinating to read it now,
and I'm not doing it in a kind of
hindsight is a wonderful thing kind of
way.
>> I hope I had a bit of foresight in
there, didn't I?
>> There is much to celebrate. You say
there are fewer countries at war than
ever before. More trade, more travel,
more connections around the globe.
Aspiration unleashed. Do you remember
standing there on that stage and feeling
like there was so much that Britain
could do on the world stage?
>> Well, I remember standing there. I don't
remember what I said in quite in
anything like the detail that you I
remember it was it was the first time I
think I'd spoken to Labour Party
conferences foreign minister. It was
still a
optimistic time. It was before the
financial crisis. It was after the
really difficult
problems in Iraq. Afghanistan was very
difficult but there was still a feeling.
It was after Vladimir Putin's Munich
Security Conference speech in February
2007 when he said that the collapse of
the Soviet Union was the greatest
catastrophe of the 20th century. So
there was some the drums were beating.
But I think that there there was still a
sense of a tide of history. remember
you'd got the enormous wave of
democratization of the 1990s, never mind
the release of Nelson Mandela and um the
end of apartheite and the global system
had just united behind the idea of the
responsibility to protect which was the
idea if states were oppressing their own
citizens, it wasn't just their business
and the state sovereignty was a
foundation of the international system
of humanitarian intervention,
>> so were human rights.
>> Yeah. Of course, it wouldn't have been
that great if you were listening to that
speech and you're an Iraqi or Afghan
civilian at that time.
>> Of course.
>> I wonder though, even as you look back
and even as we make this contrast,
whether
you think Mark Carney was right when he
at Davos talked about the idea of the
rules-based international order being
partially false. You were a Davos
yourself that there were always
exceptions to this. There was a version
of MIT is right then as well. It was a
very significant and very important
speech. And I think not just that we
should recognize that he was correct to
call out that the rules-based order
operated with more than you use the word
exceptions. I think that's that's
probably generous. I wrote a piece in
foreign affairs two and a half years ago
which said that the Ukraine war had
united the West but divided us from the
rest. And I asked why did it divide us
from the rest? And the reason was that
for the rest which are democratic
countries like India and South Africa
and also undemocratic countries they saw
the emphasis on territorial integrity on
sovereignty as being given to and
honored in the Ukraine case but not
honored in enough other cases. And
there's a range of other ways in which
the rules
>> including Iraq I have to say because I
was in South Asia when the allout
invasion of Ukraine took place and I
heard exactly this. your country was
part of a of an invasion
>> and of course two wrongs don't make a
right but still it's right to say that
it was honored in the breach as well as
in the observance the idea of a
rules-based order. Now the question then
is do you want to correct the breaches
or do you want to dispense with the
honoring and I still think that the idea
that alongside the rights of states
there are rights of individuals which
was the essential lesson that the
post-war pioneers took from the inter
war period and from the rest of history.
That's still an important lesson.
>> I think the elephant in the room in this
conversation is something directly about
the United States. That is the big
change isn't it in the last year.
>> Well it's not the only change. It's the
biggest change yet. It's the biggest
change in the last year in the national
security strategy that the Trump
administration have put out. They talk
about themselves as America will no
longer be atlas quote unquote propping
up the global system. That's not the
what came to my mind. What comes to my
mind is the US was the anchor of the
global system. Didn't mean that it
played a role in every part of it.
Didn't mean that it got everything
right, but it was the anchor. And the
anchor's been pulled up avowedly. The
Trump administration are very
consistent. They said in the campaign,
"We don't believe in this role for
America." But I'm afraid it's not only
the US. We've got to recognize that the
recession of democracy
is a phenomenon such that now there are
more autocracies than democracies in the
world today. That's significant. And
then the international rule of law is in
retreat as well. And so the the rights
that were given to individuals in the UN
charter and in associated conventions
are in uh retreat. And so I think this
dual process both of the international
system and domestically is worth calling
out.
>> And you live in the US, you live in New
York, you've made it your home since you
began leading the IRC
>> 12 years ago.
>> 12 years ago. What are the conversations
you have behind the scenes? Do you have
any one in the Trump administration that
you speak to?
>> Well, we talk to people in and around
the administration.
>> I mean, you yourself.
>> Yeah.
>> You've got that kind of access.
>> Yeah. But I don't want to exaggerate it.
We've had a partnership with the US
government for a very long time. I think
that uh there's a very strong feeling
that they've got a mandate for what they
self-describe as a revolution in
America's role in the world where they
want to think globally in economics, but
they're not going to think globally in
politics. They're going to think about
the Western Hemisphere
in politics. And that's a very big
change. And their message is get used to
it. This is the new dispensation. And
what can you say in response? What's the
way that you can make the case?
>> I make the case that it's in the
strategic interest as well as the moral
interest. If you say to people, there
are 45 million children under the age of
five who are acutely malnourished in the
world today. There's no one in the Trump
administration who says, "Oh, that's a
good thing." That's not the response
that you get. They say, "We're going to
have to find better ways of reaching
those people, more efficient ways of
reaching those people, uh more effective
ways, more impactful, more innovative
ways of reaching those people. and we
try and find that landing zone for the
conversation we have with them.
>> And I do want to talk about those ideas
because they're obviously very pressing.
And I also want to talk about the
countries that are on your latest
emergency watch list, the crises of
2026. But you mentioned the work that
you have done with previous
administrations as the International
Rescue Committee. A lot of that was
around people coming across the southern
border and arrangements for them,
provision for them. What do you think of
the way that ICE has been behaving
lately? The way that immigration rules
controls are being enforced?
>> Well, just to be clear, we've been a
major partner of the US government on
refugee resettlement, which is the
organized
transfer after very extensive vetting of
people from around the world uh to the
US over the last well since the 1980
refugee act. And actually it was Ronald
Reagan who admitted more refugees to
America on that route than any other
president and that's been stopped. So
that partnership is over. That program
has been wound up. We do also serve
asylum seekers and migrants who've
crossed the border. We also have our own
staff who have got legal status and then
are allowed to work. We don't work in
Minnesota, just to be clear. We're in 17
states but not in the state of
Minnesota. So I can't speak to the
details of that. What's clearly going on
there is that all of the tensions in
America are exploding around this issue
today. And what I know from the people
that we serve and the people that we
employ is that they've fled real danger.
That's how they've got the their asylum
claim processed and been given the right
to work. And they also are living with a
question mark about their own status and
whether or not their own story is going
to be
>> enough. Yeah. And that creates a lot of
fear, a lot of anxiety. I also want to
acknowledge that in the mo most recent
motan cases, we've been talking about
American citizens. The issues in respect
of ICE are about American citizens, not
just asylum seekers and refugees. Le
let's talk then about the countries that
you've put on your emergency watch list
like going into this new year the 10
crises that you think the world
>> 20
>> okay I I was looking at the list of the
top 10 but clearly they're not the only
ones the two crisis you put right at the
top Sudan the occupied Palestinian
territory I was looking at the
complexity of these one Sudan being a
conflict in which more than 10 other
countries are involved the other one
involving the Palestinians being
generational
These appear so intractable. Is the only
thing you can do to deal with the
immediate need rather than have any role
in finding the ways to end these?
>> Yes. I mean in short remediation of
desperate suffering is our business.
Health, water and sanitation, nutrition,
livelihoods, protection of women from
sexual violence, recovery of women from
sexual violence. That's our business. We
plead guilty to treating the symptoms.
By treating the symptoms, I would add,
you can sometimes prevent further
destabilization down the road because
the one thing you can guarantee if you
don't tend to humanitarian crisis, it
reinforces itself and produces further
instability.
>> But you personally, when you go to these
places and you sit with people and you
hear their stories, it's [snorts] such
an important part of your work. It gives
you that firsthand experience. You then
go into places where powerful people are
and you can say, "I've seen this with my
own eyes." But be honest about how it
feels to to walk away from that. Do you
also feel relieved sometimes to be able
to walk away?
>> I mean actually my team will tell you I
I I want to spend more time talking to
the clients because
>> the clients being those in need
>> being the people in need. Yeah. And more
time talking to our staff who are often
also in need. So it's
>> because you're employing people in that
group.
>> Exactly. I mean we got 500 people
working for us in Sudan. 485
of them are Sudin. We've got people who
used to work for the Bank of Kartum who
are now working for us as humanitarian
aid workers. I don't want to sound
cheesy about it, but the courage, the
tenacity,
the ability to laugh sometimes as well
as to cry. I mean, that's the most
inspiring thing. Someone once said, "If
you look at the statistics, you get
depressed. If you talk to the people,
you have hope."
>> I agree with you. I've seen it as a
journalist, but I also know that there
is that privilege of being able to walk
away and there are these moments which
just make you think I can't explain why,
you know, my life is so fundamentally
different. It's like it's the luck of
the draw.
>> Total luck of the draw. Of course, you
can explain it. I mean the
>> or I can't deal with it maybe. That's
what I mean. like do you grapple with
that or is it so much a part of your
work that this this is what you have to
do
>> that you remember the stories you feel
the sense of tragedy but I I'll never
forget the first uh trip I did with the
international rescue committee was to go
and meet Syrian refugees in Jordan and I
went to talk to a group of women and I
couldn't believe it you know there was
literally first of all I was a man going
into a all women's group they they
wanted to talk to me they wanted to cry
in front of me They wanted to tell each
of their stories. And then and I
thought, my god, this is, you know, what
these people are going through. And then
I said to them, do any of you think
you'll ever go back to Syria? And
suddenly these beaming smiles came
through the tears. The sense that they
they'd not given up. So what conceivable
grounds did I have to
>> Do you have any idea where that group
are now?
>> Some have gone back to Syria. A million
people have gone back to Syria. the ones
in Jordan. I don't know those specific
ones that that there have been returns
to Syria from Jordan. Of course, that
doesn't mean you overcome the loss or
you don't then go and find terrible
further loss
>> cuz I've struggled with that part too.
Keeping up and following the stories of
people who you've covered as a as a
journalist. You know, it's like a good
point. their story the story you wanted
in that in that moment and then
>> yeah that's that's a powerful point and
you do ask yourself you know what
happened to Abdullahi Muhammad the man I
met in Ethiopia
who was working on a water project with
us I mean you do ask yourself that and
of course you don't know
>> do you know one foreign correspondent at
the BBC once said to me that they had
put a child in Afghanistan at the center
of their piece on the then 9:00 news and
lots of people wrote into the BBC and
said, "I really want to help that
child." And he wrote back and said,
"Help this organization if you want to."
>> And people weren't interested. They
wanted to help that child. But the idea
of a connection to a wider group beyond
that didn't resonate in the same way.
And you're left with this dilemma. Of
course, you need to personalize and put
often one person is the face of a bigger
problem, but sometimes people don't want
to know about the bigger problem. And I
guess that's what you grapple with.
>> Yeah. And I think that our response to
that, the late pope said that the world
was suffering from the globalization of
indifference, which is a pretty serious
charge.
I don't know if one's allowed to argue
with the pope, but the sense I have is
that people are struggling with how to
make a difference, not that they become
indifferent.
And I think that this sense of people
wanting agency is strong. There can be
compassion fatigue. They can think
Democratic Republic of Congo is always
going to be in crisis. But I think
people's sense of humanity is strong
actually. And I think we've ended up in
the humanitarian aids or in the aid
sector in general talking too much about
inputs and not enough about outputs and
outcomes. That's what that's what's
driving us.
>> So Gaza given the number two on your
watch list. Jared Kushner has set out
his plans and his vision for Gaza. What
do you think of it?
>> Well, it would be good if it could
happen.
And that's the question. And obviously
we have a team of gardens who are
working for us. Their concern at the
moment is a long way from what was on
the slide
>> because people are living in tents
>> at best. I mean, let's let's be clear.
>> Well, some people are living in the open
air.
>> Well, the tents [clears throat] have
been blown away by the rains. There've
been very significant rains. The tents
couldn't survive it. fact that there's a
ceasefire is a a blessed relief and
gives a chance to make inroads on the
needs. Although people are still being
killed in Gaza, so I don't want
>> more than 400 have been killed
>> since the ceasefire. So yes, exactly. I
was going to say, but nonetheless, it's
better to have a ceasefire than not have
a a ceasefire. The aid deliveries are
not yet reaching the level that's
promised in phase one of the um plan
that was published. But just going back
to what you said about Jared Kushan's
plans. It would be good if they happen.
There's a part of what he set out
there's a coastal tourism zone with
tower blocks and residential areas. Are
you sure that those are for
Palestinians?
>> What was interesting, this is why it's
important to go through it. There's
obviously a very real concern that at
the moment the Israeli Defense Force are
more or less down the middle of Gaza and
west of the line is where the
Palestinians are. East of the line there
are very few of them. what was actually
projected or was for the whole of Gaza.
The promise to them is that they will
have a life that is wholesome and is
connected to the rest of the world and
connected to the rest of the Palestinian
state. Obviously, I think it's so
important to be very very practical
about how large is the distance from
where we are today to where the vision
of a Palestinian should be because that
that should drive the most powerful.
It's interesting that you referred to
the speech by Jared Kushner. The
Palestinian chairman of the technocratic
group spoke to the Davos.
>> Alishad.
>> Yeah. Spoke to the Davos conference and
spoke about how he understood the plan
that was being presented and he was
giving his authority and legitimacy
behind that. And but but I I've got to
be acutely conscious every every week I
have a meeting with our team who are in
uh Gaza
maybe every Fortnite now because I'm
away this week and the very practical
concerns of staying alive are still
there because of the health. So G given
that so much is unknown and there is
this massive gap between the immediate
needs you're talking about and the
ultimate vision as as set out by Jared
Kushner.
>> Is it the right moment for Tony Blair to
back the administration's plans for
>> you get him on your show? He's more than
capable of talking for himself. I'm not
Will you put in a word cuz our request
is infer to do that. I'll say that this
is definitely the sort of interview in
which he would thrive.
>> But have you had a conversation with him
about it? That's what I'm
>> talking briefly last week. Um he's been
very very committed for a very very long
time to the idea that there cannot be
security for Israel unless there are
rights and dignity and statethood for
Palestinians. And there cannot be
statethood and dignity for Palestinians
unless there is security for Israel. So
he he'll have to speak about this.
You'll have to ask him about what he's
doing and how he's uh how he sees it
playing out.
>> Did you caution him? Because you have
teams who are in Gaza. you are directly
connected to living conditions for
Palestinians today. Would you caution
him in how fully signed up he is to the
Steve Wickoff and Jared Kushner plan,
which he clearly is because he said he
he believes in their work to every time
I see him. This is what we're seeing
today. This is what we're seeing today.
>> How does he respond?
>> He says, "I'm on it. I want to I want to
hear it and I want to be on it." And I
mean, that's the truth. So, that's all I
can tell you. He's got no official
position. He's not
It's the Palestinians who've been
nominated uh who are in
taking actions on the ground, but you
need to get him on your show. He's he's
got talent, that guy. You know, he's
he's he's got a future ahead of him. So,
you want to go and uh get him on your
show and give him a bit of a platform.
>> It's not for want to try. I say that.
The wider picture in all of this, he is
on the executive board of the board of
peace, which it feels like the Americans
are putting forward as an alternative to
the UN. Is that the case, do you think?
>> Well, there's the Gaza element of it
which was mandated by a UN Security
Council
resolution
that's got the standing of the UN behind
it. I think we need a stronger UN, not a
weaker UN. There are internal reasons
for the UN, but there's also the point
the UN is only strong as strong as its
member states allow it to be. The
gridlock in the security council really
since 2014 since the Russian invasion of
Crimea in some ways a bit before that
has undermined that institution
but I think it's still got unique
legitimacy and credibility as an
institution and it's incredibly
important for putting if the American
anchor has been pulled up on the global
system we need to put out more buoys to
stabilize the boat and the UN is an
important part of that
>> but do you think the US is trying to
circumvent by setting up the board of
peace, by inviting Vladimir Putin,
Victor Orban, the president of Bella
Ruse, all sorts of people who you would
not associate with the best interests of
peace and security in the world.
>> Of course, now one of the things about
being a running a humanitarian
organization is there's impartiality,
there's neutrality. I've got all sorts
of things I've said in my political life
about what I think of different of these
actors leading a humanitarian
organization. I have to stick to my
lane. I know that the US administration
have withdrawn from the World Health
Organization and I've said that's
damaging
uh because the US is a potent and
positive force in global health. I'm not
going to get into what might or might
not because the truth is while the
mandate of the executive board in
respect of Gaza is quite clear, the
wider debates in international diplomacy
about what is the board of peace and how
is it going to work, that hasn't
happened yet.
>> Do you think Tony Blair knows fully what
the aims of the board of peace?
>> Well, he knows what his job is in
respect of the executive which he's on.
And so, as I say, get him on. I'm sorry
that I'm not interesting enough for you
to have to ask what I think and what
he's gonna think.
>> Trust me, there's plenty in your in in
your ballpark that that we're interested
in. I do wonder though, running a big
international organization, your donors
are crucial, right? Your work without
them can't happen. US aid has been shut
down. In the UK, a Labor government run
by people you know well, your own
brother is a is a senior minister in
that government
>> is choosing to fund its defense pledges
by taking money from the aid budget.
What did you think when you saw that
last year?
>> I didn't like that obviously and I said
so the needs that you've referred to
that are on our watch list are growing
but there's been a 50% cut in
humanitarian aid in the last year. That
means lower food rations in the World
Food Program. It means we close a
program for boys and girls to get
educated in Afghanistan for 300,000 boys
and girls. It means that Sudin refugees
in South Sudan don't get a health
center. So I I can see what those cuts
are doing. And the UK cuts are only just
coming in. They're protecting Sudan.
They're protecting Gaza. They're
protecting Ukraine.
>> They're protecting Afghanistan.
>> No. And so our program is massively
diminished there. And so what I have to
do is not just figure out, of course I
have to figure out how does a $ 1.5
billion organization become a $ 1.1
billion organization. And we've had to
do that very briskly over the last year,
but I've also had to figure out with my
with our teams, how do we remain on the
front foot for the virtues of impact,
innovation, cost effectiveness that make
us a really potent force in people's
lives. And that's what we're focused on.
We're focused on the role of the World
Bank because that has a critical role in
fragile and conflict states where
dispersement is difficult. We're focused
on the European Union which has not cut
its aid budget. It's interesting. They
have seven-year budgets in the EU.
They've not cut the budget running to
2028. They're not and they're increasing
the budget 28 to 35. So, we need to make
sure that their money is going as far as
possible, including by cooperation with
the UK. Uh we have to make sure that
organizations like the Global Alliance
on Vaccines and Immunization with whom
we partner, they're taking the money as
far as possible.
>> These are your friends in the UK
government who are making these
decisions. Sum up your emotions.
Disappointment, disgust.
>> No, they don't pretend that this is a a
choice that they wanted to make. They do
it out of in sorrow rather than in uh
glee
>> and to keep the Americans happy because
the defense spending pledge is
important.
>> Yeah. But I think the defense pledge
that we're making is driven by the
actions of Russia more than the actions
of America. Let's be absolutely clear
about that. In the 1990s and the 2000s,
the ability of Russia to threaten
European security wasn't understood in
the way that it is understood today. But
anyway, the the point is the
government's done something that I
disagree with and I'm obviously I'm far
from happy about it.
>> So what are your conversations like? Do
you keep voicing it or have you given
>> No, you because there's still an issue
how much of the of the so-called
overseas aid budget is going on support
for refugees in the UK.
>> So define too much too much. What I want
to say to people is $210 to deliver a
vaccine dose in East Africa. That's what
it costs us. We delivered 24 million of
those vaccine doses for $210.
And I want to take on the aid doesn't
work argument because when you vaccinate
a kid, two million zero dose kids in
four countries in East Africa, including
Sudan, that's a life benefit. If you
don't vaccinate that kid, it's a life
sentence
for them. Severe and moderate acute
malnutrition. We've got 45 million
children today who are severely or
moderately acutely malnourished. We know
how to address that. And by the way,
we've shown how to address it with a 30%
increase in cost effectiveness and cost
efficiency. So
my job is to say here's a an absolutely
copperbottomed investment that anyone
would think it was is a is a good
investment.
>> You speak so passionately about this and
yet I know there are congressmen in the
US who've characterized the work of the
IRC as theft and larseny.
>> Well, do you do you get exhausted in the
process of having to say these things
and feeling sometimes wrong? It's uh
it's it's easier to the No, what I'd say
to them is don't take it from me. Let's
come and meet our clients. Come and meet
our
>> Yeah, but they're not going to staff.
>> Do I give up? No.
>> I'm wondering if you get ground down by
it. That's really what I'm wondering.
>> I'm quite Maybe maybe that goes back to
thinking that one's lucky rather than
unlucky. And I don't if I was ground
down, I wouldn't be learning anything.
If you're not learning anything, you
don't do it. You do jobs until you stop
learning in them. I think
>> you came to the IRC job with lots of
experience in politics right at the
highest level of being foreign secretary
one of the greatest offices of the
state. So as you look at the Labor
government now 18 months after getting
elected what is your analysis of what's
gone wrong for them?
>> Well first of all I have to say it's not
all gone wrong.
>> You'd acknowledge that things have gone
wrong.
>> It's been a very challenging period of
course and some and there have been
mistakes made of course. Of course there
I I think that the world has changed
very very fast in the 18 months and the
world has changed very very fast since
they wrote their manifesto and when the
world changes you have to change and
that's the process that they're
undergoing at the moment. I think that
they're going to have to give clearer
direction. They're going to have to amp
up the dosage on some of the
interventions they're doing on areas
like Europe. They're going to have to do
more much more to get closer to Europe
much more uh and they're going to have
to explain what they're doing. In when I
was in politics, people used to say, "If
you're explaining, you're losing." I
think Ronald Reagan said that. Now, if
you're not explaining, you're not on the
pitch. And so, I think that there's
there's work to be done, but I know them
to be high integrity, very methodical,
quite self-critical,
and very determined.
>> Would you guard them against having an
agenda set by reform? So they focus on
the kinds of core issues for reform and
the conservatives like immigration.
>> Well, I think without losing all of the
audience who might have listened to me
happily, I'll confess to being an
Arsenal supporter and Arson Wenger once
said that his philosophy of management
was never set your game plan by what you
think the opposition are going to do.
Set the game plan by what you want to
do. And so the arson Wenger answer to
your question would be you don't take
your agenda from reform. You take agenda
from the people you're trying to serve.
That's where the agenda comes from.
>> But 18 months ago, you must have been so
happy to see your party succeed.
>> I'm still happy to see my party in
government because honestly
>> not doing well in the opinion polls. And
if they continue to not do well, Nigel
Farish could be the next prime minister
of the UK. Would a new Labour leader
make a difference to their fortunes?
>> I'm not going anywhere near that. We've
got a Labour leader. He's m for won a
general election with a majority of 145.
We're charged by the British public with
delivering on an agenda that improves
the country. And I I want to come back
to this point. When the world changes,
we have to change. There's a lot of
change going on. Take it from the Trump
administration themselves. They've set
out to have a revolution in global
affairs. That means we have to do more
for ourselves. It doesn't mean we break
the American alliance, but we have to do
more for ourselves. We have to do more
with Europeans. We have to do more with
Canadians. We have to do more around the
world. Let's focus on our own agenda.
>> What did you think when they blocked
Andy Bernham from running as a
laboratory?
>> I wouldn't have done that.
>> You wouldn't have done it? Why? Because
it creates bad blood.
>> No, I mean, he's a talented leader,
politician, and you want your talented
people in the team on the pitch scoring
goals or if they're defenders stopping
goals.
>> I wonder where you see your home. Is it?
>> Our home is here.
>> So, are you definitely going to come
back?
>> Well, trouble is you you're not always
living at home. That's the That's the
thing. So, I still sound I still sound
like an Englishman in New York to coin a
phrase. We make our own history, but not
as we choose, as someone once wrote. And
I feel very committed to the country, to
this country. Um,
it's given my family everything as we
started this conversation.
>> Has Louise? So, that's
>> Yeah. Your wife.
>> Yeah. Uh,
>> has America felt like home in the last
15 years? I know your son's
>> my home. our our kids uh were born
there, were adopted there, and I first
went to America in 1977 as a 12-year-old
for a year with with my family. I mean,
the country is an extraordinary place. I
mean, it's a teeming, thriving, driving,
ambitious place
>> and seductive, I would say. It's very
easy to become attached to it.
>> I I wouldn't say I wouldn't say
seductive. It's pretty,
>> you know, tough place. It's sincere.
they're sincere when they swear at you
in New York. So, uh the uh
I think it's
it's been our home and I think that one
has to have a profound sense of
gratitude for what it's for the life
experiences it's given me. But you asked
me a question uh where's home and I said
well here's home. So
>> what do you think your next job might
be? Is it public service? Is it private
sector? Sometimes young people come and
younger people than me come and say what
you know and I say well careers advice
hasn't been my
>> strong point I wouldn't say um I always
say the same thing look I want to make
sure that I'm doing something that does
the maximum to advance the things I
believe in consistent with the absolute
loyalty and commitment I made to my
family to to be there for them and
you don't know what comes up I I haven't
on a napkin with the dates and rolls.
So, I feel very lucky to be leading the
International Rescue Committee. I I
learn from my colleagues and from what
we do. I put myself into it and so I'm
grateful they've put up with me.
>> And do you think there is a is there
something in politics that you ever
yearn for that kind of power or is it
part of your
>> Well, I always say to people, what's the
difference between government and NGOs?
where you have more power in government
but you have more blockages on doing
anything about it. Um, if you're in an
NGO, you see the people. The danger is
you lose sight of the big picture. Doing
my job today, there are 34 million
people last year who got help. Did I
transform their lives? Did I find their
husbands? Not necessarily. Did our teams
give them vaccinations? Did they give
them a chance in life? Did they deliver
life-saving and life-changing
interventions? Yeah, they did. So,
it's a balance, isn't it? and I I don't
know what my next job is.
>> Do you still talk to some of the people
who you work closely with in exactly
that period? Hillary Clinton was the
Secretary of State at that time when you
were the foreign secretary.
>> Yeah, of course. And do
>> you still talk to her?
>> Yeah, of course. We don't just sit
around saying, "Oh, it'd be much better
in our day." I mean, it's hard. It's
hard. And
>> you don't just say that. You do a bit of
that, I bet.
>> Did I say we don't just say that or we
don't say that? the uh uh so of course
but I think that all of us want to have
a voice in our own way and I am lucky I
can have a voice but more important our
teams can do something and if I can help
them do it
>> that's good
>> David Milliband thank you
>> thank